---
layout: post
title:  'Revitalizing Culture through Gaming'
categories: Acamedic
cover_image: scenery.jpg
---
___Original title: Revitalizing Culture through Gaming: “Boundary Objects” and Properness in the Design of a Virtual Reality Game System. Published in “folio: writing and critical thinking in the university scholars programme”, 2011.___

The Digital Songlines Environment (DSE) is a virtual reality game system aimed at preserving and promoting Australian Aboriginal heritage, arts and culture. The system features a realistic virtual landscape with local flora and fauna, embedding oral histories as well as mythological stories within its narratives and story line. Similar to currently popular approaches that preserve Aboriginal culture with digital archives and online databases, DSE deploys computers and information technology as the tool and intermediary for storing and representing indigenous knowledge and heritage. Averweg and Greyling, focusing on archival databases for indigenous knowledge preservation, argue that although indigenous knowledge can be authentically recorded in digital form, including text, graphics, audio and video, the database system intrinsically presents culture and heritage in a one-dimensional manner (5). That is, a database system serves as a “telling object” or an “online museum” that explicates culture and tradition to the audience, rather than allowing negotiation and interaction between people and the indigenous knowledge space. As Christie asserts, interaction and negotiation are highly valued in Australian Aboriginal oral tradition; such practices constitute a crucial part of their cultural heritage (2).

However, the DSE, as an interactive development toolkit, provides a convenient protocol and infrastructure that allows connections and interactions with other avatars simulating Aborigines in the virtual reality game environment. At first glance, the DSE seems to have successfully tackled the conundrum raised by a digital archiving approach because of its inherent interactivity. Nevertheless, such an interpretation is based on the belief that the game protocol itself is culturally appropriate. Since the game system is primarily designed to help Aboriginal children learn about their own cultural heritage, this paper aims to analyze user experience in the virtual reality environment of DSE, and to evaluate the influence of a Western techno-scientific cultural tradition embedded in the interactive learning experience, so central to the issue of Aboriginal cultural revitalization.

The actual gaming experience of DSE is displayed in an online walkthrough video clip (“Digital Songlines Gameplay”). After entering the virtual game world, the player, an ordinary Aboriginal figure, is travelling across the land seeking a camp of the Gunggari clan in a first-person view. While the player possesses full control over the direction of walking, he is given a specific mission upon starting the game—to find his own clan. Arriving in the camp, the player can see groups of aborigines working and performing traditional practices. However, the clan members, who are program auto-controlled avatars, show no reaction at the arrival of the player, neither welcoming nor hostile; instead their actions are simply static and rather robotic. Each avatar in the game is controlled by a pre-programmed routine, such that their actions and cultural performances are rarely responsive to player interactions. Hence, real interactions between avatars in the game world are actually restricted to prescribed story lines. In addition, certain items are clickable, which is indicated by the mouse icon at the bottom of the screen. A digital encyclopedia-style information panel appears after clicking, showing the cultural background information on the selected item. The information facilitates the learning process and provides a convenient mode for exploring cultural knowledge. The walkthrough displayed on the official website of the DSE project further describes that the player will be given various quests to complete the story line; each quest is linked to certain traditional skills, such as tool-making, hunting and gathering, and Aboriginal traditional dance (“Walkthrough”).

Importantly, in the demonstration video and online walkthrough description, the avatar which the user controls is radically different from other members in the clan. While the other members are programmed to perform a static, repetitive Aboriginal act, the player in DSE is mostly framed as an external viewer or explorer. This is revealed in the way the player approaches the clan. Specifically, the Aboriginal encyclopedia style information panel on each culturally relevant item creates a distinction in identity between the viewer and the entity to be approached. This form of knowledge archiving and presentation is similar to the methods adopted in museology. In a museum setting, visitors are usually framed as explorers, approaching the exhibition for cultural immersion and exploration. In the DSE setting, a player is essentially positioned in the role of museum visitor. That is, even though in the virtual reality environment the player is immersed in the Aboriginal landscape, interactions between the player and other avatars in the environment are restricted to prescribed story lines. Similarly, information on Aboriginal culture and heritage, while freely available within the whole landscape of the country, is nevertheless predetermined and delivered as information rather than emergent in cultural interaction. The player in the game environment, given the mission of cultural exploration, interacts with other avatars, learns about tribal traditions, and picks up new Aboriginal skills as the story lines of the game proceed.

Prior to examining whether the “explorer” role of the player is appropriate for Aboriginal children’s cultural revitalization, it is necessary to understand the Aboriginal world view and cultural tradition, especially on the issue of knowledge ownership. Harris asserts that, in Aboriginal society, knowledge, similar to private property, “is owned, or looked after, by particular people.” Only certain people in Aboriginal society can sing certain songs, and some stories can only be passed on to certain groups of people (171). Thus in Aboriginal communities, knowledge is considered to be private and personal, such that only someone who is considered to be qualified should be entrusted with it. On the contrary, the Western tradition of pedagogy encourages free exploration of knowledge, that information should be freely available to those who seek it. These two conflicting views on knowledge ownership represent two radically different knowledge practices, which are inherently incompatible with each other. As Harris acknowledges, by accepting one set of knowledge practices, one has to give up the other, leading to a subtle change in culture identity (171).

In the specific context of DSE, the user approaches the virtual landscape with a mission of cultural exploration, and is positioned as an “explorer,” even though his or her identity is prescribed to be that of a member of the Aboriginal clan in the given story line. Such positioning could lead to two possible outcomes. First, the lack of communication and interaction between the player and other avatars in the game world creates a separation between the identity of the user and that of the Aboriginal clan. Users are forced to approach the game world like a “visual tour” rather than replicating Aboriginal life themselves in the game. Second, such a positioning offers the player the motive for knowledge exploration and skill collection within the game world. A player in this virtual reality game world is acting as a mission conqueror and knowledge collector. Consequently, the Aboriginal world view of knowledge ownership is distorted in the game environment. In addition, the information lookup functionality that the player possesses further enhances the notion of—as well as provides the implementing tool for—free accessibility to Aboriginal knowledge and traditions. In short, the gaming experience for Aboriginal children is inevitably influenced by Western knowledge practices. The game system itself, excluding all content-based Aboriginal knowledge and cultural elements, is not culturally neutral, but rather embeds Western epistemology within its framework of game design and development.

Pumpa, a researcher on the game development project team, recognizes DSE and most digital archiving projects as “boundary objects” between Western and Aboriginal cultural knowledge traditions, and that they thus “inhabit a boundary across social, cultural and technological aspects of radically different knowledge traditions” (47). The design and implementation of DSE system is viewed as a cultural translation and transformation process. Since Aboriginal knowledge practice in its original way is “locally authentic, specifically owned and has specific purposes,” the design and implementation of the game system are also required to be aligned with such authenticity, ownership and purpose (Pumpa 48).

A more nuanced understanding of boundary objects leads to a somewhat different conclusion than that reached by Pumpa. Star and Griesemer first introduced the concept of “boundary object” to evaluate the development process of the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology (MVZ) at the University of California, Berkeley. Unlike other natural history museums opened to satisfy the curiosity of the general public, MVZ has been devoted, since its inception, to scientific research. However, the development of the research-oriented natural history museum involves an alliance of professional biologists and amateur naturalists or collectors. Professional biologists collect standardized information from amateur naturalists and build ecological theories upon those primary data. Although all social worlds involved shared the common goal of preserving California’s natural resources, each group of actors in this alliance retained their own interests and purposes. For the general public and enthusiastic amateur naturalists and collectors, capturing and preserving animals in the museum per se is sufficient for their purposes; whereas for the professional biologists such as Grinnell, literal concrete preservation is only the prelude for further research and theoretical implications (Star and Griesemer 408). Therefore, in order to maintain the credibility of generalized scientific findings yet incorporate varied purposes and interests from different social worlds, Grinnell produced several boundary objects throughout his research work. Boundary objects do not aim at creating consensus across boundaries; instead, they are scientific objects which “both inhabit several intersecting social worlds and satisfy the information requirements of each of them.” Thus, boundary objects are internally heterogeneous. They are “plastic” enough to represent and adapt to local needs, yet remain “robust” enough to “maintain a common identity across sites” (Star and Griesemer 393). The Museum of Vertebrate Zoology (MVZ) in this context is an instance of a boundary object. Animal specimens are indexed in a standardized fashion and are preserved in the museum, which both satisfies the general public’s purpose of animal conservation, and provides the standardized information that Grinnell required for his theoretical research. Star and Griesemer categorize such boundary objects as “repositories,” indicating that people from different social worlds can access information within the boundary objects “for their own purposes without having directly to negotiate differences in purpose” (410).

Similar to the situation of MVZ, the DSE, as another instantiation of a boundary object, can also be categorized as a “repository,” in this case of Aboriginal knowledge and culture tradition. Aboriginal cultural and tradition are recorded in digital forms and are preserved inside the virtual game environment. Their knowledge and tradition are further standardized by the implementation of information lookup functionality, and thus developed into the form of a repository. The game developers and older Aborigines treat the repository as a tool for cultural preservation and revitalization, and Aboriginal children approach such a game system to understand their own cultural knowledge and traditions. However, even though boundary objects are successful in incorporating different social worlds for collaboration to a certain end, they do not eliminate conflict completely. As Star and Griesemer suggest, different social worlds often have their own “partial jurisdiction over the resources represented by the same object” (412). Mismatches in the “overlap of boundaries” will generate problems for negotiation between allies, and may undermine the “properness” of the originally proposed boundary object.

In the specific context of digitalizing Aboriginal culture, as Christen suggests, the mismatch between Western and Aboriginal cultural tradition affects the cultural properness of the implementing protocol. Christen explored local concerns about the cultural properness of a compact disc of recorded Mungamunga song tracks. Specifically, the local elders, who deliberately focused on the best way to include young Aboriginal girls in the traditional practices, were concerned that “the compact disc’s capacity for preservation does not ensure transmission to younger generations,” because it is not enough to just pass on the words of the songs to posterity. Songs recorded on the compact discs are easily accessible to all; nevertheless, “the accompanying performative traditions, territorial knowledge, and ceremonial language” must also be learned, which are the more important constituents of Aboriginal tribal tradition (Christen 429). Rather than treating culture as static content presented in digital form, Aboriginal people value a more dynamic and interpersonal form of interactive cultural tradition. And any practical method of culture preservation and revitalization must respect Aboriginal people’s values and their world view in order to ensure its cultural authenticity and appropriateness within the local context. However, compact discs, constrained by their capacities and capabilities, can only preserve the static content of Aboriginal cultural traditions, such as songs and dances, but not the dynamic interpersonal interactions that could only be experienced through real life communications and performative cultural practices. Although the compact discs successfully incorporate various social worlds under the shared goal of culture preservation, this mismatch in the idea of how to preserve Aboriginal culture between the West and Aborigines, rather than the authenticity of the archived materials themselves, undermines the appropriateness of such a method of preserving a culture and its original intentions.

Nevertheless, Christen realized that the elder women acknowledge the compact disc as one essential tool for Aboriginal cultural preservation and expansion (429). As “young girls need to be taught and the Mungamunga songs must be passed on,” by making the CD they had to perform the Aboriginal rituals and songs, which the elder women say they would not have performed otherwise, thus complicating any easy notion of commoditization. The CD recorded with Mungamunga traditional songs is intrinsically a repository of aboriginal knowledge, and simultaneously a “boundary object” that is designed to satisfy the different purposes of all related social worlds. It acts both as a tool of cultural preservation and a commodity for a wider audience; although given the Aboriginal notion of “properness,” the limitations of CD recordings suggest that it is not entirely proper to pass on Aboriginal rituals and traditions simply through such medium.

In DSE, a mismatch in the ideology of knowledge accessibility between Aboriginal and Western traditions undermines the properness of the game system in a way similar to the way the CD does. From the analysis of the user’s actual gaming experience in the virtual environment, it becomes apparent that the game protocol inherits Western epistemology and pedagogy stemming from the embedded Western techno-scientific cultural background. Users approaching the virtual reality environment are positioned as external explorers and viewers rather than as internal members of the Aboriginal clan. Since the way users interact with such knowledge is not authentic, the DSE game system would inevitably appear to be culturally biased towards the Western perspective under which the system has been designed and developed.

Both the CD and the DSE game system are boundary objects that are intricately produced to incorporate expectations and purposes of different social worlds. Preserving Aboriginal traditions and educating Aboriginal children about their own cultural heritage are, over and above all other purposes, the primary goals for which such objects are built. However, the CD and the DSE game system both have their limitations. The CD can only capture the words and songs of Aboriginal tradition; but for Aboriginal elder women, there is much more to be passed on than just the songs. And although the DSE game system creates a virtual environment that immerses users into a realistic Aboriginal tribe, it fails to provide an authentic way of interaction in the actual game play—yet it is precisely such interaction that is the key to Aboriginal cultural practices. These limitations thereby violate local sensibilities of properness, undermining the original purposes of culture preservation and revitalization. Similar to how Aborigines treat the CD as a boundary object, the DSE game systems are at best superficially regarded as a useful tool for Aboriginal culture revitalization; but when understood in terms of properness, one realizes that it is insufficient, and not entirely appropriate, to repackage a living cultural heritage into a visual tour and information-panel style game system.

### Works Cited

Averweg, Udo Richard, and Elizabeth Hester Greyling. “Some challenges for Information and Communication Technologies in Indigenous Knowledge preservation.” ___Journal of the Southern Africa Institute of Management Services___ 19.1 (2010): 15-17. Print.

Christen, Kimberly. “Tracking Properness: Repackaging Culture in a Remote Australian Town.” ___Cultural Anthropology___ 21.3 (2006): 416-446. Print.

Christie, Michael. “Computer Databases and Aboriginal Knowledge.” ___International Journal of Learning in Social Contexts___ 1 (2005): 4-12. Print.

“Digital Songlines Gameplay.” Niche Studio. ___YouTube___ 3 Aug. 2010. Web. 1 Apr. 2011.

Harris, Stephen. “‘Coming up Level’ without ‘Losing Themselves’: The Dilemma of Formal Tertiary Training for Aborigines.” Harvey, B. and S. McGinty, comps. ___‘Learning My Way’: Papers from the National Conference on Adult Aboriginal Learning.___ Perth: Western Australian College of Advanced Education, 1988. Print.

Pumpa, Malcolm. “Beyond the Map: Issues in the Design of a Virtual 3D Knowledge Space for Aboriginal Knowledge.” ___QUT ePrints___, 47-57. 2007. Web. 1 Apr. 2011.

Star, Susan L., and Griesemer, James R. “Institutional Ecology, ‘Translations’ and Boundary Objects: Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39.” ___Social Studies of Science___, 19.3. (1989): 387-420. Print.

“Walkthrough.” ___Cyberdreaming—A New Technology for an Ancient Culture— About DSE.___ n.d. Web. 1 Apr. 2011.